---
layout: post
title:  "jekyll vs wordpress"
date:   2015-08-25 10:03:13
categories: programming blog
---

I've spent the last few days spinning up my own blog. In a word, it has been awesome. I'd like to tell you about how cool of an experience I've had developing this website with a tool called Jekyll. Hopefully it will be informative and entertaining, but no promises (on it being informative, that is). 

As some of you may know, I'm going to be attending a coding "bootcamp" called Hack Reactor this fall. Hack Reactor is an intense, immersive and... interesting (I needed to keep the alliteration going!) programming course in San Francisco. In another post I will get into how I ended up deciding to attend such a program, but for now just know that it is going to be a perfect next step for me as a software developer. I can't wait for it to start actually; this (f)unemployed year off has been enjoyable, but maybe a tad boring at times. 

Anyways, I bring this up because Hack Reactor urges its students to blog about their experience during the course. They suggest we focus on the code we write or the tools we implement, but I sure hope they are ready for at least a couple posts about disc golf or the New York Rangers. After realizing Hack Reactor has such a high opinion about blogging, I realized it was time for me to get back into writing. Since my last blog was abandoned and currently is in fairly (piss) poor shape, I sought other ways of bringing my content to the world. Since I'm planning on being a web developer and have yet to build a complete website, I figured that, yeah, I should probably get on that.

The good news is, if you're reading this and you're not a hacker or a creeper in Starbucks reading over my shoulder as I write, then chances are I successfully built my website! I realize this Internet thing is pretty new, so it feels good to be one of the early adopters of this new form of expression called weblogging.

Without further ado, what follows is a brief history of the development of this blog.

#### How can you start a blog?

There are a bunch of platforms available for creating a personal blog. One of the easiest is probably Blogger, which is a part of Google. One of the reasons I mention that it's easy is that (1) you probably already have a Google account and (2) I used Blogger to start my first blog during my road trip/move to San Francisco. That's right, in my car, on my iPhone, I started my blog. And to boot, I got into only one accident while blogging in this manner. Just kidding! Obviously, when it was my turn to drive I didn't allow myself to be so distracted; I limited myself to simple texting, tweeting, pinning, snapping and some other stuff that those young whipper-snappers are doing on their phones. 

Because of it's simplicity and low barrier to entry, Blogger would be a great choice for someone who doesn't want to get into the nuts and bolts of building and maintaining a website. It does offer templates which allow you to customize the appearance of the site. You can use the free domain (web address) which will be something like yourname.blogspot.com if for some reason your parents named you Yourname. I don't even want to know what your last name is. Or better yet, Blogger will allow you to use your own custom domain, which in your case I guess would be something like yourname.com. It also offers an eay-to-use interface for writing your posts, and with a single click from this tool you can publish the post to the blog. Then all of the peoples can read your super amazing content. 

Another (super) popular option for a blogging platform is WordPress. I haven't used WordPress personally, but from what I've read it is fairly easy to set up, and you can tweak it however much or little you want, depending on how comfortable you are with managing a website. According to Wikipedia, the place where I get most (okay... all) my information, Wordpress is the most popular blogging system on the Web, and is used by almost one-fourth of the most popular 10 million websites. So, clearly, it is a powerful platform that can be used for more than just simple blogging. In fact, Wordpress is considered a content management system, which differentiates itself from Jekyll, which creates static websites. This is a great time to explain the difference between dynamic and static websites, and in doing so highlight some of the differences between WordPress and Jekyll. 

#### So what is a website, anyway?

We are inundated with the Web in our daily lives; most of us are pretty much addicted to consuming the Internet. If you think you are the exception, remember, you're on the Internet reading this page right now! (If someone printed out this article for you to read, or if you're that creeper in Starbucks, my sincerest apologies). Although websites are ubiquitous, do you know exactly how they work? Maybe you know they are HTML files that are displayed to us by the browser like Chrome or Internet Explorer, but where do the files come from? And how do the HTML files know your name after you login or sign up somewhere? 

At a basic level, every time you go to a website, your computer makes a request to that address. So, say you type facebook.com into Chrome and hit enter. Your computer makes a request to the address (http://www.facebook.com). Somewhere, some server (which is basiclaly just another computer) is listening for requests that come to that address. The job of this server is to read the request, and then return a response. Request comes in, response goes out. Request, response. Request, response. Pretty sweet life, eh? (Probably not actually... you might have to do that a thousand times a second if you're a facebook server, or sleep most of the day if you're serving my website). 

Generally, this reponse back to your computer will include a bunch of files. The browser on your computer takes these files, reads them, and presents them to you. In most cases, the response will contain HTML files (the content), CSS files (the styles that make it look cool) and Javascript files (the programming language that can be run in the browser and allows the browser, and thus you, to manipulate and interact with the content of the site). 

Now, the difference between a "dynamic" website and a "static" website generally has to do with what the server does between the request that it receives from your computer and the response it sends back. A server for a dynamic website, such as one using Wordpress, will read the request, take information from it (such as your username), get relevant data it needs (like your newsfeed) from a database, combine it all into the HTML, CSS, and Javascript files, and then send it back to the user. 

In contrast, a server that is serving up a static website does not need to query a database or change any of the files before sending back a response. In fact, when it receives a request, it has one job and one job only: serve a set of files. No need to change them, no need to add or delete or check anything; just deliver the files when anyone wants them. However, just because the files are "static" does not mean that the website "feels" static. That is, the Javascript in your browser can allow you to interact with the content (like choosing something from a menu), giving it a "dynamic" feel. On top of this, recently cropping up are backends-as-a-service, which allow a browser to access a remote database to update the data on a static website. These are a few of the reasons why it is hard to concretely define static and dynamic websites.

#### So what does this have to do with blogging?

Thanks for asking. While WordPress is a very capable platform for blogging, it can be a bit of an overkill. Being a dynamic site generator, it stores blog posts and other data for the blog in a database. Then, when someone requests to see a page on the blog, it accesses the database, renders the files, and then serves them up. This is useful for customizing aspects of the blog, such as which "related posts" show up for certain articles. Generally, however, the content of the blog doesn't change depending on who is looking at it, so having a full-fledged dynamic site generator may be unnecessary. This is where Jekyll comes in!

Jekyll is a static site generator. Basically, it is a tool that takes a bunch of files (your website), compiles them together and makes them ready to be served by a web server. Because these files don't have to be modified, these web servers can do their job quickly and your site will (generally) be faster than a dynamically-generated one. For static sites, there are a plethora of inexpensive or free services that will host your website (be the server). Even better, in the case of Jekyll, you can upload your website to Github which will host and serve your site for free with their Github Pages utility.

There are, of course, some disadvantages to building a blog with Jekyll. Because it is a static site and their is no database, it is harder to have a comments section on your blog posts. Luckily, there are some third-party plugins, such as Disqus, that allow you to add this functionality. On the other hand, adding a feature like this with Blogger or WordPress is trivial and is basically there from the start. Also, since Jekyll is more minimal and aims to get out of the way of the blog creator, it is a bit more complicated to get up and running, especially if you have no programming or web devlopment experience. With that said, it is not that difficult, and it's never too late to learn!

That's enough for now. I hope you understand a little better how those cat videos get from your brain ("I'm bored...I wonder if there's some funny cat videos I haven't seen yet [for the third time]...") to the webserver, through your eyeballs and back to your brain ("...nope, already saw that one!"). In the next post, I'm going to show you the basic steps on how to get a Jekyll project up and running.
